<chapter id="about">
<title>About &frescobaldi;</title>

<para>
&frescobaldi; is named after
<ulink url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Girolamo_Frescobaldi">Girolamo Frescobaldi (1583 – 1643)</ulink>,
an Italian organist and composer.
</para>

<para>
&frescobaldi;'s homepage is at <ulink url="http://www.frescobaldi.org/">www.frescobaldi.org</ulink>
and there is a mailinglist at
<email><ulink url="mailto:frescobaldi@googlegroups.com">frescobaldi@googlegroups.com</ulink></email>
(<ulink url="http://groups.google.com/group/frescobaldi">more info</ulink>).
</para>

<sect1 id="credits">
<title>Credits</title>

<para>
The following people have contributed to &frescobaldi;:
</para>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term>Main author, core developer and Dutch translation:</term>
<listitem>
  <para>
  Wilbert Berendsen (<ulink url="http://www.wilbertberendsen.nl/">www.wilbertberendsen.nl</ulink>)
  </para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>French translation:</term>
<listitem>
  <para>
  Valentin Villenave (<ulink url="http://valentin.villenave.info/">valentin.villenave.info</ulink>)
  </para>
  <para>
  Yann Collette
  </para>
  <para>
  David Bouriaud
  </para>
  <para>
  Ryan Kavanagh
  </para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>Turkish translation:</term>
<listitem>
  <para>
  Server ACİM (<ulink url="http://acim.name.tr/">acim.name.tr</ulink>)
  </para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>Spanish translation:</term>
<listitem>
  <para>
  Francisco Vila (<ulink url="http://www.paconet.org/">www.paconet.org</ulink>)
  </para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>Russian translation:</term>
<listitem>
  <para>
  Sergey Poltavski
  </para>
  <para>
  Artem Zolochevskiy
  </para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>Italian translation:</term>
<listitem>
  <para>
  Gianluca D'Orazio
  </para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>German translation:</term>
<listitem>
  <para>
  Henrik Evers
  </para>
  <para>
  Georg Hennig
  </para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>Czech translation:</term>
<listitem>
  <para>
  Pavel Fric
  </para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>Polish translation:</term>
<listitem>
  <para>
  Piotr Komorowski
  </para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>Galician translation:</term>
<listitem>
  <para>
  Manuel A. Vázquez
  </para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

</variablelist>

<!-- TRANS:CREDIT_FOR_TRANSLATORS -->

</sect1>

<sect1 id="license">
<title>License</title>
&underFDL;
&underGPL;
</sect1>

<sect1 id="contributing">
<title>Contributing</title>
<para>
&frescobaldi; is a <ulink url="http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html">Free Software</ulink>
project to create a user friendly &lilypond; music score editor.
&frescobaldi; is written in <ulink url="http://www.python.org/">Python</ulink> and 
uses the <ulink url="http://www.kde.org/">KDE4</ulink> libraries as a foundation.
The goal is to make &frescobaldi; available on all platforms supported by KDE.
</para>

<para>
&frescobaldi; is developed in a public GoogleCode SVN repository at
<ulink url="http://lilykde.googlecode.com/">lilykde.googlecode.com</ulink>.
There you can browse or checkout the source code and report bugs and wishes.
</para>

<para>
You can contribute by simply using &frescobaldi; and reporting bugs and suggestions.
Translations are also very welcome. How to create new translations is described
in the <filename>README-translations</filename> in the <literal>po</literal> directory
in the source distribution of &frescobaldi;.
If you want to add functionality you can find information about the source code
structure in the file <filename>README-development</filename> in the source distribution.
</para>

</sect1>

</chapter>