<chapter id="entering">
<title>Entering Scores</title>

<para>
&frescobaldi; provides a host of features to help you to enter &lilypond; music scores as fast as possible.
</para>

<sect1>
<title>Score Setup Wizard</title>

<para>
The Score Setup Wizard, at <menuchoice>
  <shortcut><keycombo><keycap>Ctrl+Shift+N</keycap></keycombo></shortcut>
  <guimenu>&lilypond;</guimenu>
  <guimenuitem>Setup New Score...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice>, makes
for a quick start of many types of music score. In the first tab you can enter
titling information, in the second tab you can compose your score of many
available part types. Doubleclick a part type to add it to your score (or click
<guibutton>Add</guibutton>). Select the part in the score list to change some settings for the selected
part, if desired. Many parts, especially Choir, have powerful options to set up
the score the way you want it.
</para>
<!-- TODO: images -->
<para>
In the third tab you can set some general adjustments, e.g. whether to create
MIDI output or not, which key and time signature you want to use, etc.
</para>

<para>
Clicking <guibutton>Try</guibutton> presents a demo score with some random notes filled in.
Clicking <guibutton>Ok</guibutton> writes the &lilypond; code to your text document,
waiting for music etc. to be added.
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="autocomplete">
<title>Context Sensitive Autocompletion</title>

<para>
&frescobaldi; has a context-sensitive automatic
completion feature. In most cases it will be enabled by default. It will pop up
relevant completions as you type. The autocompletion popup can be enabled or
disabled under 
<menuchoice>
  <guimenu>Settings</guimenu>
  <guisubmenu>Configure &frescobaldi;</guisubmenu>
  <guisubmenu>Editor component</guisubmenu>
  <guisubmenu>Editing</guisubmenu>
  <guimenuitem>Auto Completion</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice>.
Even if disabled, you can always show the popup with <keycap>Ctrl+Space</keycap>.
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="expand">
<title>Quick Text Expansions</title>

<para>
Type e.g. <userinput>rel</userinput> and then press <keycap>Ctrl+.</keycap> (period).
&frescobaldi; will expand it to:
</para>

<programlisting>
\relative c' {

}
</programlisting>

<para>
and place the cursor right after the pitch so you could change it. If you then
move the cursor a line down, you can start typing music notes or other
shortcuts. E.g. typing <userinput>F</userinput> and then <keycap>Ctrl+.</keycap> yields <computeroutput>\key f \major</computeroutput>. There are many
many more default shortcuts. Press <keycap>Ctrl+.</keycap> (without having entered an existing
shortcut) to have a dialog open with all defined shortcuts. In this dialog you
can also add, alter or remove shortcuts. See the "What's This" info (<keycap>Shift+F1</keycap>)
for more information.
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="rumor">
<title>MIDI input via Rumor (Linux only)</title>

<para>
&frescobaldi; can use <productname>Rumor</productname>, enabling you to enter music just by playing it on a
MIDI keyboard (or even your computer keyboard). This has some limitations: you
can only play monophonic music (notes or chords). Rumor also does not support
tuplets.
</para>

<para>
Setup: Start the Rumor plugin by clicking on its tab in the bottom of the
&frescobaldi; window. The Rumor panel appears at the bottom. In the panel is a
settings dialog where you can configure which MIDI input and output you want to
use.
</para>

<para>
If you have a MIDI keyboard controller but no audible output device you can run
an ALSA MIDI-client like TiMidity++. &frescobaldi; can do this for you when you
press the TiMidity-button (you can configure it to run any command in the main
config dialog under <menuchoice>
  <guimenu>Settings</guimenu>
  <guisubmenu>Configure &frescobaldi;...</guisubmenu>
  <guimenuitem>Paths</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice>). &frescobaldi;
remembers the settings, so the next time it will automatically start the MIDI
client.
</para>

<para>
If you have no MIDI-controller you can also set the MIDI input to 'Computer
Keyboard' in the settings screen of the Rumor plugin. This way you can play on
your computer keyboard like a piano.
</para>

<para>
Entering music: Clicking the <guibutton>Record</guibutton> button starts Rumor. If all is well you hear
a metronome and you can start playing; you'll see the notes appear. Clicking
<guibutton>Record</guibutton> again or pressing <keycap>Escape</keycap> stops Rumor. If you already entered the key and
time signature in your document, &frescobaldi; will automatically use it, to
interpret alterations correctly. &frescobaldi; will also output pitches
automatically in the language you use in the document.
</para>

<para>
You can configure the shortest note value to use using the <guilabel>Quantise</guilabel> option.
If you enable the <guilabel>Step</guilabel> checkbox, Rumor will directly output every note played,
without a duration.
If you enable the <guilabel>Mono</guilabel>checkbox, Rumor will not output chords, but only single
notes.
</para>

<para>
Under the <guibutton>Settings</guibutton> button you can configure some more settings. A powerful
feature of Rumor is that it can load special scripts that change the Rumor
output. This is useful when you write e.g. music with complicated rhythms. You
can configure which scripts to load, and even put your own Rumor Guile scripts
in <filename class="directory">~/.kde/share/apps/frescobaldi/rumor/</filename>.
More information about writing Rumor scripts is on the
<ulink url="http://www.volny.cz/smilauer/rumor/">Rumor homepage</ulink>.
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="quickinsert">
<title>Quick Insert Panel</title>

<para>
The Quick Insert Panel is available in the left dock. It currently has one panel
to add articulations and other symbols to your music. It can also add those
symbols to all notes or chords in a selected music fragment.
</para>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="other">
<title>Other shortcuts</title>

<para>
<menuchoice>
  <shortcut><keycombo><keycap>Ctrl+;</keycap></keycombo></shortcut>
  <guimenuitem>Repeat last note or chord</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice> repeats the last entered note or chord with
all its suffixes (ties, articulations, etc.)
</para>
</sect1>
</chapter>
