<chapter id="lilydoc">
<title>The &lilypond; Documentation Browser</title>

<para>
Frescobaldi has a built-in browser for &lilypond;'s extensive documentation,
accessible by clicking on its tab at the right or by pressing
<keycap>Meta+Alt+D</keycap>. The browser can display locally installed documentation
(e.g. installed in a local directory or via your operating system distribution)
or the documentation at the &lilypond; website.
</para>

<para>
&frescobaldi; first searches the &lilypond; documentation on the local system;
if it isn't found the documentation pages from
<ulink url="http://lilypond.org/doc">lilypond.org/doc</ulink> are shown.
You can configure the URL or path to the &lilypond; documentation under
&menu.settings.paths;. If you configure a local path, specify it including the
<filename>index.html</filename> filename.
</para>

<para>
The documentation browser works just like a normal browser. The Home button
brings up the documentation start page. By right-clicking the browser view you
can open any page in your default browser. By right-clicking a link in the
browser view you can open the link in a new browser or other suitable application.
</para>

<para>
You can also get context-sensitive help by right-clicking a &lilypond; statement
in the text editor. The <guimenuitem>&lilypond; Help</guimenuitem> context submenu
then displays the relevant entries both from the Learning Manual and the Notation
Reference.
</para>

<para>
The other small buttons correspond with the so-called "rellinks" (related links)
in the &lilypond; documentation. This way you can easily navigate the documentation
or jump to the table of contents, etcetera. (Different versions of the &lilypond;
documentation have subtle differences in the navigation.)
</para>

<para>
If you click an image of music that links to a &lilypond; snippet, the snippet is
shown in a read-only editor view with LilyPond syntax highlighting.
</para>

<sect1 id="lilydoc-shortcuts">
<title>Keyboard shortcuts</title>

<para>
(Click once in the browser view to give it the keyboard focus, by default
the keyboard focus remains in the text editor when the browser is opened.)
</para>

<informaltable>
<tgroup cols="2">
<tbody>

<row>
<entry><para><keycombo><keycap>BackSpace</keycap></keycombo></para></entry>
<entry><para>
Go back a page in the browser view.
</para></entry>
</row>

<row>
<entry><para><keycombo><keycap>/</keycap></keycombo></para></entry>
<entry><para>
Start entering a short search phrase to search for in the current page.
</para></entry>
</row>

<row>
<entry><para><keycombo><keycap>ESC</keycap></keycombo></para></entry>
<entry><para>
Quit entering a search phrase.
</para></entry>
</row>

<row>
<entry><para><keycombo><keycap>Enter</keycap></keycombo></para></entry>
<entry><para>
When in the search phrase entry, finds the next occurence.
</para></entry>
</row>

<row>
<entry><para><keycombo><keycap>Tab</keycap></keycombo></para></entry>
<entry><para>
Navigate the links in the page.
</para></entry>
</row>

<row>
<entry><para><keycombo>
<keycap>Arrows / PgUp / PgDn</keycap></keycombo></para></entry>
<entry><para> Scroll the page or move the cursor. </para></entry>
</row>

</tbody></tgroup></informaltable>

</sect1>
</chapter>
