<chapter id="running">
<title>Running &lilypond;</title>

<sect1 id="pdf_output">
<title>Creating PDF output</title>

<para>
There are currently two different ways you can run &lilypond; on your document.
</para>

<para>
The default one (by pressing the toolbar button or <keycap>Ctrl+M</keycap>) is to output a PDF
preview document. This document contains clickable notes and other objects. If
you click on a note or other object, &frescobaldi; will put your textcursor in the
correct place (and even open the document for you if needed).
</para>

<para>
In the <guilabel>&lilypond;</guilabel> menu, you can also find the option <guilabel>Run &lilypond; (publish)</guilabel>.
This option also runs &lilypond;, but with clickable notes disabled. The resulting PDF
is much smaller and better suitable for distribution via e-mail or the Web. With
large musical scores, disabling the clickable notes can make the PDF many times
smaller.
</para>

<para>
While &lilypond; is running, you can follow its progress in the log view. If
&lilypond; encounters errors, you can click on the messages to place the text
cursor in the offending line and column. If there are many errors you want to
correct without waiting for &lilypond; to be finished, you can click the &lilypond;
button again to abort the running &lilypond; process.
</para>

<para>
When you want to run &lilypond; on your text document, it needs to be saved to
disk first, so &lilypond; can read it. (Currently, you can not run &lilypond; on
non-local &lilypond; documents.) If your document has not been saved yet,
&frescobaldi; asks you to save it to a local file. If your document has been
modified, &frescobaldi; asks you to save it first.
</para>

<para>
If you want &frescobaldi; to always save your last modifications before running
&lilypond;, you can go to
<menuchoice>
  <guimenu>Settings</guimenu>
  <guimenuitem>Configure &frescobaldi;...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice>
and check the option <guilabel>Save document when &lilypond; is run</guilabel>.
</para>

<para>
After a succesful &lilypond; run, you will see some buttons appear at the bottom
of the Log view.
</para>

<para>
If &lilypond; created a PDF, a button will be shown to open the PDF in the default
PDF viewer, and a button to (directly!) print the PDF by sending it to the <command>lpr</command>
command. (You can configure a different print command in &menu.settings.printcommand;.)
</para>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="midi_output">
<title>Creating MIDI output</title>

<para>
If &lilypond; created a MIDI file, a button will be shown to play the MIDI in the
default MIDI player. If you want &lilypond; to create a MIDI file, add a <userinput>\midi { }</userinput>
line in your <userinput>\score { }</userinput> section, like this:
</para>

<programlisting>
<![CDATA[\score {
  \relative c'' {
    \time 7/4
    c2 bes4 a2 g a bes4 a( g) f2
  }
  \addlyrics {
    Join us now and share the soft -- ware!
  }
  \layout { }
  \midi { }
}]]>
</programlisting>

<para>
Be sure to also add a <userinput>\layout { }</userinput> line if you add a <userinput>\midi { }</userinput> line, otherwise
&lilypond; will not generate a PDF.
</para>

<para>
Also an email button is shown, allowing you to easily send the source and output
documents to someone else using your default mail client.
</para>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="include">
<title>&lilypond; files that include other files</title>

<para>
When working on large music scores, it might be possible that you divide the
musical score in different files, and include them from a "master" file. Such a
master file, named e.g. <filename>NewSong.ly</filename>, might look like:
</para>

<programlisting>
<![CDATA[\version "2.12.0"

\header {
  title = "New Song"
}

\include "LayoutSettings.ly"

\include "SopranoPart.ly"
\include "PianoPart.ly"

\score {
  <<
    \new Staff = "soprano" \sopranoMusic
    \new Lyrics \lyricsto "soprano" \sopranoText
    \new PianoStaff <<
      \new Staff = "right" \rightHandMusic
      \new Staff = "left" \leftHandMusic
    >>
  >>
}]]>
</programlisting>

<para>
The files <filename>SopranoPart.ly</filename> and <filename>PianoPart.ly</filename> just contain the music definitions and
<filename>LayoutSettings.ly</filename> has some settings for font and page layout etc. Neither one of
them has a <userinput>\score { }</userinput> section in it. So pressing <keycap>Ctrl+M</keycap> and running &lilypond;
while you are working on such an included document might not make much sense, as
it would probably not generate a PDF output file (the document only contains
music expressions that are assigned to variables).
</para>

<para>
In such cases, you can tell &frescobaldi; that another file is the "master" file
for the current document. When you run &lilypond;, &frescobaldi; will run &lilypond;
on the master document rather than the current document. So in <filename>SopranoPart.ly</filename>
and <filename>PianoPart.ly</filename> you add a special line that is just a &lilypond; comment. But
&frescobaldi; will read the line and understand that you want &lilypond; to be run
on the master file. Here is an example how <filename>SopranoPart.ly</filename> would look like:
</para>

<programlisting>
<![CDATA[\version "2.12.0"

% Soprano part

sopranoMusic = \relative c' {
  c d e f g f e d
}

sopranoText = \lyricmode {
  Boer er ligt een kip in't wa -- ter
}

%%master: NewSong.ly
]]></programlisting>

<para>
The last line <userinput>%%master: &lt;filename&gt;</userinput> directs &frescobaldi; to compile <filename>NewSong.ly</filename>
instead of the current document when &lilypond; is started.
</para>

<para>
There are two related special comments: <userinput>%%master-preview:</userinput> and <userinput>%%master-publish:</userinput>.
Those will only compile the named file in either preview or publish mode. That
can be useful if you include several movements or e.g. hymns in a master file,
where every source file has it's own score section. If you e.g. use
<userinput>%%master-publish</userinput>, running in preview mode will just show the current document,
but running in publish mode will compile the master document so you get a view
on the whole score or book. 
</para>
</sect1>

</chapter>
